# 23-24C: Challenges from Chapters 23 to 24

## 23-1:

<blockquote>
In addition to if statements, most C-family languages have a multi-way switch statement. Add one to clox. The grammar is:

switchStmt     → "switch" "(" expression ")"
                 "{" switchCase* defaultCase? "}" ;
switchCase     → "case" expression ":" statement* ;
defaultCase    → "default" ":" statement* ;

To execute a switch statement, first evaluate the parenthesized switch value expression. Then walk the cases. For each case, evaluate its value expression. If the case value is equal to the switch value, execute the statements under the case and then exit the switch statement. Otherwise, try the next case. If no case matches and there is a default clause, execute its statements.

To keep things simpler, we’re omitting fallthrough and break statements. Each case automatically jumps to the end of the switch statement after its statements are done.
</blockquote>

See original solution: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/note/answers/chapter23_jumping/1.md

This is the rare occasion I'll disagree with Nystrom. I know that Nystrom is simplifying this to make it more approachable, but... nah.

Switch-cases aren't usually implemented as glorified chained if-elses. If that were the case, the only advantage a switch-case would have over an if-else chain is syntax.  
*Thoughts:* To be fair, that's what C-style for loops (and even iterator-based for loops!) are in relation to a while loop.

To my understanding, switch-case is implemented as hash-table lookups for a jump instruction or binary search trees. This is mainly to make key finding an `O(lg N)` or even `O(1)` complexity. The additional memory overhead and compile time makes this more than worth it, especially for a lot of cases.

**Marked as TODO.** I'll have to have a Lox object version of `HashTable` so that I can stuff the switch-case jump table into the constants array. I could do that now, *or* wait until I get multiple inheritance running and fully implement the Lox HashTable. Jury's out on that. *Will probably also need a new opcode for that...*

Further reading:
- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Branch_table
- https://xoranth.net/gcc-switch/

# 23-2:

<blockquote>
In jlox, we had a challenge to add support for break statements. This time, let’s do continue:

continueStmt   → "continue" ";" ;

A continue statement jumps directly to the top of the nearest enclosing loop, skipping the rest of the loop body. Inside a for loop, a continue jumps to the increment clause, if there is one. It’s a compile-time error to have a continue statement not enclosed in a loop.

Make sure to think about scope. What should happen to local variables declared inside the body of the loop or in blocks nested inside the loop when a continue is executed?
</blockquote>

**Marked as TODO, along with `break`.** I was putting this off before due to knowing of The Great Compiler Refactoring, but I probably could stuff that information into the Compiler struct now.

# 24-1:

<blockquote>
Reading and writing the ip field is one of the most frequent operations inside the bytecode loop. Right now, we access it through a pointer to the current CallFrame. That requires a pointer indirection which may force the CPU to bypass the cache and hit main memory. That can be a real performance sink.

Ideally, we’d keep the ip in a native CPU register. C doesn’t let us require that without dropping into inline assembly, but we can structure the code to encourage the compiler to make that optimization. If we store the ip directly in a C local variable and mark it register, there’s a good chance the C compiler will accede to our polite request.

This does mean we need to be careful to load and store the local ip back into the correct CallFrame when starting and ending function calls. Implement this optimization. Write a couple of benchmarks and see how it affects the performance. Do you think the extra code complexity is worth it?
</blockquote>

See original solution: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/note/answers/chapter24_calls/1.md

**Added.**

# 24-2

<blockquote>
Native function calls are fast in part because we don’t validate that the call passes as many arguments as the function expects. We really should, or an incorrect call to a native function without enough arguments could cause the function to read uninitialized memory. Add arity checking.
<blockquote>

**Marked as TODO.**

At first I wanted to add variadic functions into Lox (since C has them, why not?). However, I think it would be easier to pass in an `Array` whenever variadic arguments can be passed. That way, there's no extra logic to handling variadic functions; simply one plus the number of mandatory arguments.

*THoughts:* Lox does not currently support function overloading. Changing the function signature from its name to its name *and* its arguments is possible, though things get hairy when you ask how the VM is supposed to fetch the right function if we dont even know how many arguments there are. 

Could refer to Wren. Could be considered. If this it done, it **must** be done in conjunction with 21-2.

## 24-3

<blockquote>
Right now, there’s no way for a native function to signal a runtime error. In a real implementation, this is something we’d need to support because native functions live in the statically typed world of C but are called from dynamically typed Lox land. If a user, say, tries to pass a string to sqrt(), that native function needs to report a runtime error.

Extend the native function system to support that. How does this capability affect the performance of native calls?
</blockquote>

See original solution: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/note/answers/chapter24_calls/2.md

**Marked as TODO.**

Due to my C/C++/Java experience warping the world around me, I intend to add Exceptions (and possibly derived variations) as an object type into Lox, with the following properties: 
- Exceptions contain one or more strings that represents the exception message, exception type, etc.
- If an Exception is obtained as a value, walk through each call frame to check for a `try` clause execution.
- If one is found, discard all previous call frames and jump to the corresponding `catch` clause.
- If no try clause is found, print the Exception as a runtime error and exit with INTERPRETER_RUNTIME_ERROR.

This addition would necessitate:
- Scanning for `try` and `catch` as reserved keywords
- Parsing for try-catch clauses
- Compiler and VM support for new opcode `OP_TRY` with a jump operand of 2 bytes.