# 27-29C: Challenges from Chapters 27 to 29

# 27

<blockquote><ol>
<li>Trying to access a non-existent field on an object immediately aborts the entire VM. The user has no way to recover from this runtime error, nor is there any way to see if a field exists before trying to access it. It’s up to the user to ensure on their own that only valid fields are read.<br>
How do other dynamically typed languages handle missing fields? What do you think Lox should do? Implement your solution.</li>

<li>Fields are accessed at runtime by their string name. But that name must always appear directly in the source code as an identifier token. A user program cannot imperatively build a string value and then use that as the name of a field. Do you think they should be able to? Devise a language feature that enables that and implement it.</li>

<li>Conversely, Lox offers no way to remove a field from an instance. You can set a field’s value to nil, but the entry in the hash table is still there. How do other languages handle this? Choose and implement a strategy for Lox.</li>

<li>Because fields are accessed by name at runtime, working with instance state is slow. It’s technically a constant-time operation—thanks, hash tables—but the constant factors are relatively large. This is a major component of why dynamic languages are slower than statically typed ones.<br>
How do sophisticated implementations of dynamically typed languages cope with and optimize this?</li>
</ol></blockquote>

**TODO: add native functions hasField, getField, setField, deleteField for all user-defined classes.**

I am unsure of whether to add these as native functions or native *methods.* Native methods make the interface for calling cleaner but produces some *jank* if users decide to shadow them. I want these to be available at all times.

Calling these functions for non-instances should return an Exception object.

As for `4.`, some rudimentary research indicates:

- Python instances share the same hash table for fields ala. database-style. Whenever a new instance is created, another 'column' is added, whereas the rows store the fields themselves. Because Python allows for field declarations inside classes, the compiler has a pretty good idea on the minimum size of the table, even as it grows due to new instances and new dynamically-inserted fields.

- Some just-in-time compilers implement type-checking for native types they can use optimized solutions for, and a fallback option for more general usecases (such as overloading the `+` operator for non-numeric types).  
  *Source: [StackExchange](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/419714/how-are-dynamic-and-static-typings-implemented).*
  - I imagine this could also be done for field access if fields are declared in the class body: allocate space for declared fields so that we can just use pointer offsets to access them. Otherwise, use a hash table for dynamically-set fields.

# 28

<blockquote><ol>
<li>The hash table lookup to find a class’s init() method is constant time, but still fairly slow. Implement something faster. Write a benchmark and measure the performance difference.</li>

<li>In a dynamically typed language like Lox, a single callsite may invoke a variety of methods on a number of classes throughout a program’s execution. Even so, in practice, most of the time a callsite ends up calling the exact same method on the exact same class for the duration of the run. Most calls are actually not polymorphic even if the language says they can be.<br>
How do advanced language implementations optimize based on that observation?</li>

<li>When interpreting an OP_INVOKE instruction, the VM has to do two hash table lookups. First, it looks for a field that could shadow a method, and only if that fails does it look for a method. The former check is rarely useful—most fields do not contain functions. But it is necessary because the language says fields and methods are accessed using the same syntax, and fields shadow methods.<br>
That is a language choice that affects the performance of our implementation. Was it the right choice? If Lox were your language, what would you do?</li>
</ol></blockquote>

See original solutions: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/tree/master/note/answers/chapter28_methods

None of these are to be implemented, other than *maybe* 28-1.

For 28-3, I don't think this is a *wrong* choice? But it is certainly less efficient than a more typical implementation though. Not that big of a fan of Wren's fields leading with underscore, though. IMO that's a bit of an arbitrary design choice, and arbitrary design choices are what lead to the inscrutable monolith that is Python.

If I made Lox my own, I'd probably include field declarations in the class body, and make setting a non-existent field a runtime error (unless you use the more explicit `setField` function). Then again I would also do a lot of things. Like static type-checking.

# 29

<blockquote><ol>
<li>A tenet of object-oriented programming is that a class should ensure new objects are in a valid state. In Lox, that means defining an initializer that populates the instance’s fields. Inheritance complicates invariants because the instance must be in a valid state according to all of the classes in the object’s inheritance chain.<br>
The easy part is remembering to call super.init() in each subclass’s init() method. The harder part is fields. There is nothing preventing two classes in the inheritance chain from accidentally claiming the same field name. When this happens, they will step on each other’s fields and possibly leave you with an instance in a broken state.<br>
If Lox was your language, how would you address this, if at all? If you would change the language, implement your change.</li>

<li>Our copy-down inheritance optimization is valid only because Lox does not permit you to modify a class’s methods after its declaration. This means we don’t have to worry about the copied methods in the subclass getting out of sync with later changes to the superclass.<br>
Other languages, like Ruby, do allow classes to be modified after the fact. How do implementations of languages like that support class modification while keeping method resolution efficient?</li>
</ol></blockquote>

See original solutions: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/tree/master/note/answers/chapter29_superclasses

For 29-1, I won't be addressing this. Wren's solution of making fields specific to each class is pretty good all things considered, though it does turn into a pain in the ass if you want to *modify* said properties unless you have implemented half-decent syntax for getters and setters beyond typical method calls. Wren has this, though, so no complaints here.

For 29-2, the first thought I had was versioning. Though, inline caching is a more elegant solution that goes hand-in-hand with versioning. Eagerly copying-down every time a method is called seems.. wasteful.

# 29-3


<blockquote>
In the jlox chapter on inheritance, we had a challenge to implement the BETA language’s approach to method overriding. Solve the challenge again, but this time in clox. Here’s the description of the previous challenge:

In Lox, as in most other object-oriented languages, when looking up a method, we start at the bottom of the class hierarchy and work our way up—a subclass’s method is preferred over a superclass’s. In order to get to the superclass method from within an overriding method, you use super.

The language BETA takes the opposite approach. When you call a method, it starts at the top of the class hierarchy and works down. A superclass method wins over a subclass method. In order to get to the subclass method, the superclass method can call inner, which is sort of like the inverse of super. It chains to the next method down the hierarchy.

The superclass method controls when and where the subclass is allowed to refine its behavior. If the superclass method doesn’t call inner at all, then the subclass has no way of overriding or modifying the superclass’s behavior.

Take out Lox’s current overriding and super behavior, and replace it with BETA’s semantics. In short:
<ul>
<li>When calling a method on a class, the method highest on the class’s inheritance chain takes precedence.</li>
<li>Inside the body of a method, a call to inner looks for a method with the same name in the nearest subclass along the inheritance chain between the class containing the inner and the class of this. If there is no matching method, the inner call does nothing.</li>
</ul>

For example:

<code>class Doughnut {<br>
  cook() {<br>
    print "Fry until golden brown.";<br>
    inner();<br>
    print "Place in a nice box.";<br>
  }<br>
}<br>
<br>
class BostonCream < Doughnut {<br>
  cook() {<br>
    print "Pipe full of custard and coat with chocolate.";<br>
  }<br>
}<br>
<br>
BostonCream().cook();</code>

This should print:

<code>Fry until golden brown.
Pipe full of custard and coat with chocolate.
Place in a nice box.</code>

Since clox is about not just implementing Lox, but doing so with good performance, this time around try to solve the challenge with an eye towards efficiency.
</blockquote>

See original solution: https://github.com/munificent/craftinginterpreters/blob/master/note/answers/chapter29_superclasses/3.md

I honestly would've just started walking the inheritance chain lol

The solution is nice, though a variation of versioning does have to crop up so that both functions are still accessible with the right semantics. This is also not at all intuitive to the way we think of inheritance now, and therefore won't be implemented.