# 30C: Challenges from Chapter 30 + Reflection

<blockquote><ol>
<li>Fire up your profiler, run a couple of benchmarks, and look for other hotspots in the VM. Do you see anything in the runtime that you can improve?</li>

<li>Many strings in real-world user programs are small, often only a character or two. This is less of a concern in clox because we intern strings, but most VMs don’t. For those that don’t, heap allocating a tiny character array for each of those little strings and then representing the value as a pointer to that array is wasteful. Often, the pointer is larger than the string’s characters. A classic trick is to have a separate value representation for small strings that stores the characters inline in the value.<br>
Starting from clox’s original tagged union representation, implement that optimization. Write a couple of relevant benchmarks and see if it helps.</li>

<li>Reflect back on your experience with this book. What parts of it worked well for you? What didn’t? Was it easier for you to learn bottom-up or top-down? Did the illustrations help or distract? Did the analogies clarify or confuse?
The more you understand your personal learning style, the more effectively you can upload knowledge into your head. You can specifically target material that teaches you the way you learn best.</li>
</ol></blockquote>

## 30-1

My build environment is jank (running a `.sh` shell script, in Windows, to build the solution via an external vcpkg directory and cmake, and then immediately running it) so debugging and profiling tool are (to my knowledge) not that accessible to me.

Obviously the hash tables are going to be a performance bottleneck until the end of time. Such is the nature of a dynamically-typed language with dynamically-set fields. Improving that would probably see improvements across the board for instances.

## 30-2

This will not be implemented. I'm considering `ord()` and `char()` native functions ala Python to make transitioning between strings and numbers easier. Helper native functions like `isAlphabet` and `isDigit` probably wouldn't hurt either.

An unsigned 32-bit integer representation or byte-equivalent for bitwise operations would be useful for more low-level applications of Lox, with the associated bitwise operators to go along with it. I'll probably also want to add support for hexadecimal literals if I go in this direction. 

This isn't a direction I *plan* to take — Lox to me is such a high-level language that it doesn't make much sense to me to expose this functionality to the end-user — but [others have done so to great success](https://transmissionbegins.com/ToT/2025/06/13/customising-the-language-lox-for-the-pico/). In my opinion? If you want to do bit shenanigans, you'll probaly want static typing and type punning too.

Adding iterators to strings would probably necessitate the optimization in 19-2 to avoid creating ten thousand `ObjString` instances whenever we iterate over a file.

## 30-3

This was a learning experience and a half. I'm not even done with the things I want to add!

But I think that following the book is a bit of a no-brainer — for the most part I copied down the code in Crafting Interpreters verbatim. There's no layer of translation necessary, unlike the AST version where I had to port over Java implementations into C++. It didn't *quite* necessitate full understanding.

But writing the documentation did.

Document [01I](../internal/01I_Opcodes.md) is by far the most helpful internal document I've written for this project. It forced me to examine the semantics in how these opcodes work, and how the Compiler and VM work by extension. It makes everything easier when you understand it through "but how do we transmit this information?"

Of course, in reality it's less clear-cut: we define opcodes to do operations that are *useful*, and cannot be done by combinations of other opcodes. That's the point. LLVM does not dictate on-high that thou shall not use specific opcodes, even if it has calcified enough that most compilers compiling to LLVM follow the pre-existing standard.

I can think of a few things I'd want to change. As of writing, `OP_DUPLICATE` takes no byte operands. It's such a rare operation that I think it'd be useful to add a byte operand for which slot to copy, rather than defaulting to the top of the slot.

Or the `OP_CONSTANT_LONG` variants. Oh gods the `LONG` opcode variants.

I think it would be useful to have them. 256 constants is short enough that even Nystrom admits any real program would exceed it. I'm also putting it off because its frankly a lot of work for no immediate payout. Going back to Document [14-17C](14-17C.md) and updating that list every time feels like reading my death warrant lol

I've also added quite a bit since then. Honestly break and continue are my greatest accomplishments when it came to technical difficulty, but everything I added so far felt like making Lox more *mine*. And that's what I intend to continue doing.

There's still much on the to-do list. Namely, non-exhaustively:
- Static class methods
- Property getters and (maybe) setters
- Exceptions
- Lox Sequences and Arrays
- Lox Hash Tables and Hash Sets
- Multiple inheritance
- Square bracket (`[]`) indexing for Sequences and Hash Tables
- Iterables, iterators and foreach loops
- STL:
  - File reading and writing
  - Math operations
  - Mutating and non-mutating algorithms for container classes

So yeah!